---
title: "Definitions"
date: 2020-08-02T16:54:39+05:30
draft: false
---

### Blockchain as a distributed ledger
A blockchain is the ordered list of all transactions since inception. A transaction is an atomic event, an event whose sub-event parts make no sense in isolation.

Banks, especially, are prone to identify blockchain as a distributed ledger as it indeed dovetails with their models of the world.

In this view, instead of each bank relying exclusively on their own table of accounts in their own siloed (SQL) databases, the blockchain offers the promise of consolidating the table of accounts of one bank with the table of accounts of another, typically in the case of a transaction between accounts. At the moment, this is done through netting and then settlement via central bank or corresponding accounts, which turns out to be expensive and time-consuming. That's one reason why transactions between banks, especially if in different countries, take so long.

The blockchain's elegant solution is to use a single transaction to update separate tables of accounts for the whole network, i.e. of all participating banks. Banks view this technology, at the very least, as an opportunity to reduce operational costs by using a common, distributed ledger with their peers.

### Blockchain as a data structure
A blockchain is a well-ordered set of blocks. A block is a list of transactions in a set sequence.

### Blockchain as a decentralized consensus network
A blockchain is a well-ordered set of data, on which all peers eventually agree. What all participants agree upon is construed as the single truth. This single truth is the single true state of the distributed ledger.

### Blockchain as a digital common
There is much talk about tech giants milking their positions and monetising data generated by users of their open platforms. Because they are ultimately in control of their platforms, they can erect barriers, censor and seek rents.

The blockchain, as a distributed system, is, in a way, in charge of itself. To participate may not be free (as in _free beer_), but is nonetheless governed by rules defined in the protocol and enforced by all participants, and as such can be seen as free (as in _free speech_). However small, an honest participant, contributes to the enforcement of the protocol rules.

Additionally, a blockchain-based organisation could decide on how to reward participants, and evolve such reward structure. This would be different from current organisations that are typically defined at the outset.

In this, and other, regard, blockchain can be seen as a digital common. Or any number of digital commons.

### Blockchain as a new computing paradigm
Imagine a computer, how do you describe its working? It takes commands then executes them in an ordered and deterministic fashion. The sequence of execution determines the state the computer is in.

Now, an Ethereum blockchain is an ordered list of transactions defined with a Turing-complete language. Each transaction is in effect a command, and the "execution" of all these commands results in a state that is the Ethereum computer's state. Each new transaction changes the state of this computer. In effect an Ethereum blockchain defines a distributed state machine, a world computer, the state of which all nodes agree on.

Bitcoin's lack of Turing completeness ensures it cannot truly be identified as a world computer.

With this introduction, a smart contract is a program on the world computer, a distributed application (or DApp) is one too, or a cooperating collection of smart contracts.

However, it comes with the usual risks of new, relatively untested technology. For banks Ethereum is considered much more risky than a well-tested and astonishingly stable bitcoin protocol.

### Blockchain as a merge of data storage and network
In the history of computing, data storage and network have long been kept separate, essentially because the former was adopted long before the latter. Storage was then connected to the network.

On the other hand, blockchain merges these two concepts into one. This has huge implications on the techno-social systems building on top of the technological layer. (cf. Vinay Gupta, https://vimeo.com/161183966)

### Distributed vs. decentralised
There is great debate as to what properly constitutes distributed as opposed to decentralised systems. And systems can in fact be a mix of both.

Please watch now the [5 minutes presentation of Greg Slepak](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S1IqaSLrq8). Greg explains the concept of decentralisation in 5 minutes.
